[Music]
the next uh Storyteller I asked him our
question which is what is a mystery that
you would like science to explain and he
said how does a single cell grow up to
be a human
being well I think I know that I mean
when a man and a woman fall in love
right
okay I'm not even a
scientist Dr sidartha Mukerji
okay thank
you in the spring of
1947 about 6 months before India would
be split on the the northern front into
India and Pakistan and on the Eastern
Front into Bangladesh and West Bengal my
grandmother who was a single mother
moved five of her boys from her Village
in borish southern part of Bangladesh to
a safe haven in
Kolkata now I use that word move very
casually as if it's something you could
do very easily you could get up and
catch a train or catch a bus or maybe
even a ferry but this was literally the
most deliberate the most calculated and
the most seminal moment in her history
and in the history of our family had she
waited 6 months she would have faced an
incredible political configration rapes
pillages occupations of homes but she
did move and she came to Kolkata as an
immigrant and not as a refugee and that
distinction was critical for her she
came to a home which she then could live
in as opposed to the camps which others
came 6 months after her she came with a
full suitcase had she waited 6 months
she would have come with an empty
suitcase into an overpacked
City why did she come what made her move
6 months before in fact what gave her
the confidence to move well decades
later she would tell the story which
became a sort of Mythology in our family
myth in our family and that is that
about 6 months before
around the time um she lived as many
Hindus did in Bangladesh in a relatively
traditional home the architecture was
traditional and in fact the home was
divided up into three quarters three
living quarters there was an outermost
quarter where uh Muslims were allowed to
step move talk there was an intermediary
quarter where the accountants would sit
and they were allowed to perform
business between Hindus and Muslims and
then there was the threshold to the
innermost quarter and it was impossible
for any Muslim to step into that
innermost quarter and my grandmother
said and maintained that about 6 weeks
before she moved she had watched perhaps
it was a vision maybe it was real she
had watched a Muslim man cross all the
way from the outermost quarter and put
his leg or his hand into the innermost
threshold and this for her whether it
was a dream was it a dream was it a
vision but this for her was a seminal
experience it was a signal of something
to come it was an occupation even if it
was an occupation of that Crossing of a
threshold and she went to consult her
friends her relatives who lived all
around her and they said that's all
nonsense you're dreaming um why don't
you stay you know things have always
been tense between Muslims and Hindus
but there's been a stable tension here
but she wouldn't listen to them she in
fact lifted up packed her bags suitcases
and moved with her five young
children this experience was a peculiar
experience for her because rather than
making her believe it actually made her
disbelieve and by disbelieve I mean she
began to fully disbelieve that anyone in
the world could be correct except for
herself um and this
process hardened her it was as if
something had broken and then restruct
reset itself like a bone or a piece of
Steel and that process of annealing had
in fact hardened her enormously people
talk about the the very loving Indian
grandmother she was the opposite of the
the loving Indian grandmother in in 1964
she moved before I was born she moved
with my father to our which was there
was then going to become our home in
Delhi and she set up her own living
quarters there with a threshold and you
could only cross that threshold if you
had bathed she was became incredibly
austere um she would clean her floor
every day and she had only four items of
clothing and she replaced them she would
wash one to wear one and she became one
of her measures of incredible austerity
was that she began to essentially eat
the same meal every day she would have
boiled lentils and rice for lunch and
boil lentils and rice for dinner the
same meal over and over
again and um I have a I have a couple of
memories of her from my childhood one
memory is that I looked through recently
while I was thinking about the story I
looked through photographs there are
many photographs of me with her and yet
not in one photograph is she actually
touching me she had become peculiarly
aversive to touch and the other memory
that I had um was that um I had at one
point of time I I had made a picture of
of a tiger if I remember correctly and
brought it to her as grandchildren often
do for appreciation and she looked at me
and she she looked at the picture and I
said do you like it and she gave the
very famous Bengali
nod which
means yes but it can also mean it's
horrible um we've all heard about the
tiger mom she was the mom of the tiger
mom she was the tiger
grandom um well there are many
disadvantages in life to having the same
meal of lentils and boiled rice every
day but there's one advantage that is
you live for a very long time and indeed
she did she lived for a very long time
and then something bizarre and
astonishing began to happen to her and
that is that she began to have a very
acute sense of her dying of actively
dying and and I remember this because
one morning my father was about she was
about 80 years old my father was about
to leave on a tour to another city and
as he was coming down the stairs she
called him and she said I think she said
don't go I think I'm going and uh my
father looked at her quizzically and she
said I think I'm coming to an end and my
father wondered about what was going on
with her but she really she she he had
learned by this time that usually when
she made declarative statements she was
usually right and so he stayed back and
when I came back from school I was I
also heard the same story I went to her
room and I said Grandma what's what's
happening and and is there something I
can do for you can I bring you something
and she said yes I want some
sweets and I thought you know not only
is this woman losing her body she's
losing her mind I said sweets and she
said yes I want there's a particular
Bengali sweet which is a luxury made of
milk and she said I want sweets so in
deference to all of this I got on my
bicycle rode off and I brought back a
pack of these Bengali Sweets like can
candy and she ate five of them and she
said she had she had never had five
sweets in the last 20 years she felt
very sated and then she literally in the
most astonishing manner got on her bed
and began to prepare to die and over the
LA the next 24 hours we watched her
slowly decline in front of our eyes in
full astonishment a priest was brought
in and her breathing slowed and slowed
more and then there was that
uncomfortable moment that many of us
don't know which is the moment in which
there's a kind of gurgling gasping sound
it's called air hunger in medicine and
then the air hunger subsided and she was
no
more the next morning we got ready for
her funeral now I had been to a funeral
I had been had seen an Indian funeral
I'd seen them before but I'd seen them
sort of distantly I remember a moment
when I was seven or 8 years old I went
with my father to bernis the city where
many many Indians will cremate burn
their dead it was it had rained the
night before before I was 7 or 8 years
old it had rained the night before and
the the gut which is the stone step that
leads out onto the river it was wet it
was slippery and then I was on a boat
and the boat was on the ganga the Ganges
and I would drove out onto I rode out
onto the boat with the boat man and then
all of a sudden the boat turned to bend
and we were at the burning guts the guts
were actually the dead or burnt and it
was an astonishing sight a sight that
takes your breath away because all along
you're on this River and all along
there are these Stone steps and their
bodies burning like lanterns lit along
the river and there men and women
performing the rights of the Dead
carrying them moving them down into the
water bathing the dead bringing them
back and laid and and putting them on
the funeral PES and then setting them a
light and occasionally a priest would
come and shovel the still burning embers
into the
water in in Plato there's a moment in
which the soldier leonus says he cannot
look upon the Corpses
but as a child of seven how can you not
look and so I had to look my curiosity
was literally
morbid and as I was watching I saw one
of these men who who had probably
previously been carrying a body he was
holding out his arms but he was just
carrying air and then just just like
that the boat rounded a bend and we were
back in the city of Banaras someone was
throwing bird seed at pigeons there were
children playing and the normaly of Life
returned just as quickly
well this was what we did with my
grandmother to some extent as well we we
we brought her over she was now placed
in a in a white SAR uh my father and I
mostly my father I she we carried her
into the water we bathed her and then we
lifted her out of the water and uh we
moved her into the into the wooden p and
my father lit the uh my father lit the
uh lit the fire and we watched all of us
we watched um until all that was left
was the little umbilicus that's the last
part of the body to burn
and then everything else had become Ash
and gone up into
smoke decades later um I became an
oncologist I saw cancer patients I I
still see cancer patients and um I went
to the funeral of a woman who had died
of breast cancer um and this was in
Boston it was in a church very near
Boston and I while I was driving that I
was thinking about this woman's death
this woman had actually died in the
hospital uh she hadd been admitted
because she had been short of
breath um but she had been admitted
alone she had come from an acute care
center been admitted directly to the
hospital her relatives her family had
been unable to get to the hospital in
time and in fact she had died overnight
an intern had pronounced her dead and by
the time the children had come to the
hospital she'd been fully uh fully
dressed up again as it were and I was I
went to the funeral and as I walked
towards the coffin I noticed something
unusual I looked on and her lip someone
had put lipstick on her lipstick on this
body and there was a weird chill that
went through my body it was as if the
entire process had become sanitized
become ethereal and sanitized and so I
went back the next morning and I talked
to my residents in my interns and I said
I asked them how many of them had
actually lifted a body what does a
weight feel like um it is a peculiar
thing I don't know how many of you have
It's A peculiar thing because it is as
if gravity has become changed the word
gravity which has to do with the word
grave
all of a sudden they collide with each
other even when you're lifting a
sleeping child the muscles cooperate
with you it is only when you lift the
dead when you realize that it is a
failure of the muscles the muscles go
away and what about that moment that
that that air hunger that I talked about
how many of you have experienced that
air hunger or have have seen it or of
course the thing that's written so often
in literature the idea of the light
going out in someone's eyes how many of
us have seen the light go out in
someone's eyes
it seemed to me then that we're actually
actively forgetting how to die we're
actively forgetting what the act of
death looks like what it seems like what
it feels like what it weighs like it
seems to me sometimes that we've become
a culture that is forgetting the rituals
that are associated with death it seems
sometimes that we're like that man who's
on the river bank and we're holding up
our arms but there's no counterweight to
Bear it is it seems as if sometimes that
we just just holding up air thank you
[Applause]